




PREVAILING PRAYER
By 
Tony Marshall Anderson

"As a Prince hast thou power with God and with men, 
and hast prevailed." -- Gen. 32:28





Dedicated

To His own elect, which cry day and night
unto Him.





The Foreword

The labor of love represented in this little book has been presented in hope 
that it will be avmeans to promote a greater interest in the power of prayer.

The reader will please accept my witnessing to the truth concerning my personal
experience in praying. It is not I, but Christ. To Him be the glory and the 
praise for all that has been achieved by prayer.

It was not possible to give a complete exposition of the Scriptures quoted in 
this message on prevailing prayer. My one desire has been to encourage the 
people of God to devote more time to prayer and diligently labor to understand 
the promises relating to prayer.

Your Servant in Christ,

T. M. Anderson





Contents

1 Covenant of Prayer
2 The Scriptures Revealed in Answer to Prayer
3 A Spiritual Awakening in Answer to Prayer
4 A Revelation of God in Answer to Prayer
5 The Secret Place of Prayer in the Heart
6 A Sufficient Provision for Prayer
7 A Scriptural Pattern of Prayer
8 The Throne of Grace
9 Praying in His Name
10 The Saviour Prays for His People





1

A Covenant of Prayer

In the Month of January, 1950, I entered into a covenant of prayer with the 
Savior. At the time this covenant was made I was teaching in the Department of 
Bible at Asbury College. It was my purpose to do some writing on the Epistle to 
the Hebrews, and I had made plans to begin this work in January. In order to 
have the time to devote to my writing it was necessary for me to arise early in 
the morning, because my schedule of teaching began at eight o'clock. I arranged 
my daily work so that I could retire early in the evening, and arise about two 
o'clock and begin my writing.

At the beginning I realized the need of special help from the Lord; and I prayed 
earnestly that He would enable me to understand the Scriptures; and help me 
prepare a written message that would glorify Him, and enlighten His people. On 
January the sixth I was suddenly awakened at midnight: at the time I did not 
know what had aroused me so suddenly, and knowing that I had a full day of work 
before me, I felt it necessary to sleep a few more hours. At that moment the 
Savior spoke to me: He asked me if I could remain awake long enough to give Him 
time to talk with me in the quiet hours of the morning? He reminded me that 
there is a fast in denying ourselves of sleep, even as there is a fast in 
abstaining from food.

For five hours I waited before the Savior in holy worship and communion. My soul 
did greatly rejoice in His Presence, and my spirit was refreshed; and my body 
felt no weariness from loss of sleep.

It was during the quiet hours after midnight following the visitation of the 
Savior that I entered into a covenant of prayer with Him. I took account of my 
time spent in prayer during the average day. I felt ashamed before the Lord when 
I discovered how little time had been given to prayer. It had been my daily 
practice from the time I was converted to pray evening and morning.

The family altar was established at the beginning of my married life. In my 
pastorate, and in my calling to the field of evangelism, I had not failed to 
pray and rest my soul on the Savior. But in all of these years of ministry, I 
had never known the power and pleasure of prevailing prayer like it was revealed 
to me when I waited five delightful hours in the Presence of the Savior.

Since making this covenant of prayer, my cares and concerns of daily life rest 
upon my soul lighter than the clothing on my body. I have discovered the secret 
of casting all my cares upon Him; I have found the place of His rest. My body is 
often weary in His work; but my spirit knows no weariness, my soul dwells at 
ease, and my heart is quiet and undisturbed in a world of trouble.

There was a time when the burden of preaching was almost more than my body could 
stand. I was restless in the night, and would awaken with the distressing 
responsibility of the work hanging over me. It took sleep from my eyes, and 
greatly impaired my health. It is clear to me now that I had not learned the 
secret of rest. I was pushing and pulling in my own strength, and was not 
trusting to the Spirit of God to bring things to pass.

I have the same responsibilities of preaching, and have the same concern about 
the victory in the work of the Savior: but I have found rest unto my soul, and 
have learned that His yoke is easy, and His burden is light.

When I entered into this covenant of prayer it was not as an experiment; it is 
an imperative necessity in my life. It has been a delight to my heart to meet 
Him at the throne of grace while the day is young. It has become a fixed habit 
of life to pray; I consider it to be more important than my daily bread.

I am persuaded that a covenant of prayer is the norm of spiritual living. The 
Psalmist yearned for the abiding place with the Lord; for he said, "One thing 
have I desired of the Lord, and that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the 
house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and 
to inquire in his temple. For in the time of trouble he will hide me in his 
pavilion: in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me upon 
a rock." (Psalms 27:4-5)

When I made the covenant of prayer with the Savior it was necessary for me to 
arrange the plans and pursuits of my personal life so that there would be no 
conflict with my time devoted to prayer. I discovered that the things of daily 
living were crowding and congesting my spiritual life, and like Martha, I was 
careful and troubled about many things.

The legitimate things of life are not evil, but when we permit them to master us 
it is wrong in the sight of the Lord. In a very real sense, I emptied myself of 
all earthly possessions and cares before the Lord. I took my personal interests, 
such as my teaching, and my preaching, and my time for a vacation, and my home, 
and placed them in a heap before the Savior; and I separated my heart and mind 
from them. I reckoned myself to be dead to all earthly things. I made a solemn 
promise to the Savior that I would not allow the temporal things of life to 
interfere with my worship and praying. I made a vow to take sufficient time to 
wait in His Presence, and watch with Him in prayer. I considered it to be far 
better to sacrifice my personal affairs, and count all things loss for Christ, 
rather than gain the whole world, and suffer spiritual loss to my soul.

I have adopted the words of a Psalm in my covenant of prayer. "My voice shalt 
thou hear in the morning, O Lord: in the morning will I direct my prayer unto 
thee, and will look up." (Psalm 5:3)

It has been my practice for many months to keep the morning watch with the 
Savior. Some amazing results have been obtained by prevailing prayer during the 
silent hush of the new day. The achievements of these sacred hours spent with 
the Savior have exceeded my greatest expectations.

I know that I have not fathomed the depth of God's infinite goodness made 
available by prayer; neither have I explored the vast reaches of His mercy 
disclosed in the promises of answered prayer.

It is not my purpose to overlook the necessity of praying at all times. The 
Psalmist said, "Evening and morning, and at noon, will I pray, and cry aloud." 
(Psalm 55:17) However I do not believe it is possible to place too much emphasis 
upon the value of praying in the still hours of the morning. The Savior 
evidently made this a practice of His life, for it is recorded, "In the morning, 
rising up a great while before day, he went out, and departed into a solitary 
place, and there prayed." (Mark 1:35)

The hours between midnight and six o'clock in the morning are the most peaceful 
hours of the entire day. The duties and distractions of the preceding day have 
ended, and the cares and burdens of the new day have not begun. If one has 
retired at a reasonable time; and the body has rested for a few hours, and the 
mind has been cleared and relieved of the confusions of the day, then he can 
prevail with God in prayer, as at no other time.

I find the most practical time of the morning is from three o'clock to five. If 
one cannot spend but thirty minutes in prayer, I suggest that four o'clock be 
the chosen hour to meet God. To put off praying until a later time, one will
 often be hindered by the labors and engagements of the new day.





2

The Scriptures Revealed in Answer to Prayer

During the quiet hours of the morning, in January, 1950, I prayed the Savior 
would be pleased to give me a greater measure of understanding in His Word. For 
many years I had made a study of the Scriptures; in fact, I could read several 
books of the Bible without looking at the printed pages.

But I knew that the Scriptures had a depth of meaning, and a vast store of 
eternal truth that I had not been enabled to see and fully understand by my own 
reasoning. I realized my need of an enlarged concept of God's plan of 
redemption to enhance the effectiveness of my ministry. it was the one earnest 
desire of my heart to have a complete revelation of Christ and His saving truth 
to enable me to preach the gospel.

At the time I prayed nothing unusual happened; but not many days after that 
season of prayer, when I began to lecture in the class room at Asbury College, 
the Word of God began to be revealed to my heart and mind with a depth of 
meaning that I had not known in all the years of my ministry. I listened to my 
own lecture with great amazement and interest. I said things about the truth of 
Christ, and the plan of redemption that had not been previously prepared in my 
notes for the lecture. The truth which surged in my soul, and poured out of my 
heart was not a result of my own reasoning; it was a revelation of the Word of 
God far beyond my own thinking. I knew that the Spirit of the Lord was guiding 
me into the redemptive truth of Christ, and taking the things of Christ and 
showing them unto my hungry heart according to the Savior's promise.

My soul was in great peace, and His living Word was like fire in my heart and 
mind. To this good hour, by the mercy and grace of my Lord, this flaming truth 
abides in my heart, and the Spirit continues to reveal the Word in a greater 
measure to my mind day after day. My soul yearns to know more about the Savior, 
and more about His eternal truth, that I may be enabled to proclaim His power to 
save to the uttermost all that come unto God by Him. My Lord has been pleased to 
increase the fruitfulness of my ministry. He has given the unspeakable pleasure 
of seeing many souls saved by His grace. I witness to the glory of my Christ, 
that He has blessed my humble ministry for more than forty years. But after I 
entered into a covenant of prayer with Him, and have faithfully kept watch with 
Him in the silent hours after midnight, He has given me more than seventeen 
thousand and five hundred souls, in less than two years. 

Several pastors and evangelists have been influenced to make a covenant of 
prayer with the Savior, and have met Him in the morning watch. Many have 
witnessed to the power of God in their preaching, and to an increase in the 
fruitfulness of their messages from the Word. Great revivals have followed as a 
direct result of praying in the restful hours before the dawn.





3

A Spiritual Awakening in Answer to Prayer

A few weeks after I had made the covenant of prayer with the Savior, I learned 
that several students in Asbury College were praying for a revival.

Some of these earnest souls prayed all night; and others joined them in prayer 
after midnight. On February the twenty-third, 1950, during the morning service 
in the chapel, the great revival began. It continued with great power day and 
night more than a week. The news of it spread all over the Nation, and into some 
foreign countries. People came hundreds of miles to attend some of the services. 
It is a conservative estimate to say that at least five thousand persons were 
directly influenced in spiritual living by this wonderful visitation from God.

The morning that the revival started my soul was aflame with a desire to see a 
manifestation of God's saving power. It was impossible to contain the surging 
passion of my heart any longer. With the permission of the Dean, I exhorted the 
students to seek the Lord; for I believed it was God's time to answer the 
prayers of His people, and give us a great revival. At that moment the Holy 
Ghost moved upon the entire student body with deep conviction. In all the years 
of my ministry in the field of evangelism, I have never witnessed any revival to 
compare with this marvelous visitation from the Savior. It was a revival born in 
the hours of agonizing prayer when a faithful few sacrificed sleep to be alone 
with God.

The small part that I may have contributed to this spontaneous revival was a 
direct result of intercessory prayer. In a morning in late January, preceding 
the gracious manifestation of God, I was praying and worshipping before the 
Lord. My soul was in great agony of intercession. It seemed that my body was 
being crushed under the burden of prayer for the salvation of the lost. My pain 
of spirit was exceeding severe, and my heart was broken with sorrow for the 
unsaved, and my tears streamed down my face. I began to confess the sins of the 
world to the Savior like they were my own sins.

My travail of soul continued for about thirty minutes; and I knew that in some 
peculiar way I had entered into the sufferings of Jesus, and was sharing His 
supplication with strong crying and tears. I obtained the assurance that He had 
heard my petition.

From that hour it has been my sincere belief that a revival will come to this 
benighted world if the people of God will deny themselves of food and sleep, and 
will agonize in prayer with the Savior. Is it possible that we are too indolent 
and indifferent to feel the deep concern over the lost that our Lord felt when 
He saw the multitudes going astray like lost sheep? Can it be true that we are 
too sleepy to watch with Him a few hours in the Gethsemane of prevailing prayer?





4

A Revelation Of God in Answer to Prayer

"Shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us..

"He that hath seen me hath seen the Father."

A man can express much in a few words of prayer. When Philip made this request 
for a revelation of the Father, he voiced the deepest longing of a human heart; 
no man can be satisfied without a full revelation of God. Philip did not ask the 
Savior for the impossible, because He said to Philip, "He that hath seen me hath 
seen the Father."

It was not the exclusive privileges of the disciples to see the Father revealed 
in the Son. If the immortal Christ could satisfy the heart of an earnest seeker 
after God in the days of His flesh, He is the same Christ today, and He is rich 
in mercy toward all that seek Him. Christ only, can satisfy our hungry hearts by 
a revelation of the Heavenly Father. No man hath seen God at any time, but the 
only begotten Son hath declared Him. Jesus came into this world to make the 
Invisible God visible to mankind; for Jesus Christ is the brightness of the 
glory of God, and the express image of His Person. This immutable truth abides: 
the fleeing centuries have not impaired its eternal worth, and the dust of the 
ages has not obscured it.

I am a witness to this living truth. During the peaceful hours of the morning, 
in January, 1950, I was praying and waiting in worship before the Savior, when 
suddenly He stood before me, and I saw Him clearly with the eyes of my 
understanding. I ceased praying and remained silent in His Presence. The moment 
was too sacred for me to speak to Him. I do not know how long He continued with 
me; the passing of time was not noticed: to me, eternity had begun, and time had 
ceased.

When my Lord manifested Himself to me that eventful morning, He opened a door 
into the heavenly world to me; and by His good grace, I have not lost sight of 
His Blessed Face for one moment since that momentous hour.

The manifestation of the Savior marked an epoch in my life; it was an entrance 
into a new realm of eternal light to me. I had come into a world of unlimited 
possibilities in spiritual achievements. I remembered the promise, "Behold I 
have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it." The Eternal Christ 
is the Door: and He had opened to me a measureless expanse of moral and mental 
development. From that hour of gladness, my soul has felt no restrictive 
limitation; I am free to explore the infinite resources of God; for He has set 
my feet in a large room.

This gracious revelation of the Savior enabled me to understand what David meant 
when he said, "I foresaw the Lord always before my face, for he is at my right 
hand, that I should not be moved." (Acts 2:25, Psalm 16:8) No language can 
adequately express my boundless joy when the Savior stood before me that 
morning. I know it was not a beautiful dream, I walked about the room and 
rejoiced in His Presence.

Someone may ask if there is a scriptural basis for believing that the Savior 
will reveal Himself to us in this age of reason. I asked myself the same 
question, and began to seek diligently for a word of revealed truth to support 
my faith in the reality of the experience which I had received.

Was I a misguided soul, led astray by my own over-wrought imagination? Was I a 
hapless victim of a mental disorder? Could it be that the vision was a 
hallucination created out of my wishful thinking? These were some of the 
questions presented to my mind. 

My searching of the Scriptures was rewarded by finding revealed truth to assure 
my heart before Him. I recalled the words of Jesus spoken to His disciples: "Yet 
a little while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see me: because I live, 
ye shall live also ... He that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will 
love him, and will manifest myself unto him." The Savior spoke these words 
following the request of Philip, "Shew us the Father."

These words of the Savior glowed with a new light, and imparted a new meaning to 
my rejoicing heart. This promise was sufficient to confirm my faith in the 
reality of the Savior's manifestation. I needed no other promise to support my 
faith, and substantiate my sincere claim. 

The Scriptures affirm that the disciples did see the Savior after His passion: 
"He shewed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen 
of them forty days, and speaking of things pertaining to the kingdom of God. 
(Acts 1:3) 

It is the fact of a living Christ that establishes the foundation of our faith 
for eternal life: because He lives, we shall live also. How could one know that 
Christ lived if He never revealed Himself at any time after His death? The fact 
of a living Savior makes the new birth a reality to an immortal soul. It is a 
living Christ that makes the experience of entire sanctification a vital reality 
in life.

We know that the Savior manifests Himself to a penitent soul seeking for pardon. 
We do not doubt the fact that Christ reveals Himself to the believer seeking to 
be sanctified. In view of these fundamental facts, shall we say it is incredible 
to think that the Savior would manifest Himself to an humble seeker in prayer?

Shall we take the unwarranted position that the only time the Savior manifests 
Himself is in the two epochs of grace known as pardon and purity? God's 
infallible Word declares He did manifest Himself to His people in the ages past. 
A prophet foresaw Him revealed in the flesh, and called His Name Immanuel, which 
means, God with us. 

If the only time that men have seen God is in the dateless past, then we, in 
this age of the gospel are deceived in our hearts; and there is no truth to 
support our faith in a risen Savior. If God has clothed Himself in perpetual 
silence, and wills to remain invisible to mortal man in this dreary world, then 
our faith is vain, and our hope of life is a delusion. I am not presenting these 
truths from the Word of God to defend my claim to have seen the Savior while 
praying in the early morning. I was not seeking such an experience: I was 
praying and worshipping when suddenly He manifested Himself to me. To my own 
heart it was a confirmation of the promise, "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto 
the end of the world." (Matthew 28:19)

If this promise contains no reality, and He is not present with us always, even 
unto the end of the world, then it has no place of value in our faith. 

It is utterly meaningless, and stands as a vain and pretentious claim of the 
Savior. This is the cold logic to which one is driven, if the Savior is not 
manifestly Present with us in all time, and throughout all eternity. If our 
minds fail to grasp the import of this revealed truth; and if our faith is too 
feeble to appropriate the promises, it may be because we have substituted 
ritualism for reality, and have emphasized the figurative rather than the 
factual in religion. There is a faith which obtains the substance of the things 
hoped for, and brings to the soul the evidence of things not seen.

It is deplorable to see how far the church has drifted into rationalism. She has 
apparently lost sight of Divine revelation as a basic fact of saving faith. Many 
of the devout people in the church are obviously lacking in spiritual 
discernment; some refer to these realities as mysticism.

To the world the promised manifestation of the Savior is unknown. He was in the 
world, and the world knew Him not. In the estimation of the world, we are crazy 
to profess to have received a manifestation of the Savior. The unbelievers in 
the church voice the same disbelief that characterizes this rationalistic 
generation. They are like Festus who said with a loud voice, "Paul, thou art 
beside thyself; much learning doth make thee mad." But the ages have felt the 
spiritual impact of this dynamic man, who said to Jesus, "What wilt thou have me 
do."

The manifestation of the Savior in answer to prayer should not be considered the 
unusual in Christian experience; it is evidently the norm of spiritual life. It 
is recorded that the place was shaken where they were assembled together in 
prayer, and the believers were filled with the Spirit.

This was a filling subsequent to the fullness of the Spirit received on the day 
of Pentecost. It was not a "third blessing"; it was a mighty visitation of God, 
reaffirming His promise to be with them to the end of the world. I do not expect 
a manifestation of God's power sufficient to shake a building, but in the light 
of this truth, I have a scriptural foundation for my faith to expect a 
manifestation of the Savior in answer to an importunate prayer offered in a time 
of desperate need. 

Unless the preachers and people in the Holiness movement take time to pray, and 
give less time to programs and plans, the movement will soon be in woeful want 
of spiritual power to withstand the evils of the modern age. The Almighty God 
revealed in His beloved Son is our refuge and strength. We must prevail in 
prayer in these last days or utterly perish. Our hope and our help cometh from 
God, Who has promised to answer the agonizing prayers of His people. 





5

The Secret Place of Prayer in the Heart

"But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy 
door, pray to thy Father which is in secret." (Matthew 6:6)

There is a time to pray, and there is a place to pray. It was a custom of our 
Lord to depart into a solitary place, and there pour out His heart to the 
Father. He often found relief from His burden of prayer among the friendly 
hills; and in the unbroken silence of the desert.

Jesus evidently meant to disclose the pattern of His own praying in these words 
spoken to His disciples about praying in secret. The closet was a secret chamber 
in an Oriental home, generally used for a place of privacy. Jesus selected this 
secret place to impress us with the necessity of having an appointed time, and a 
secret place to commune with our Heavenly Father. Jesus speaks of "Thy closet." 
He recognizes that we can have, and must have a secluded place to meet with God 
in prayer. To Him, a secret place for prayer was a necessary part of His own 
life; it was built into His living like the closet was built into the home.

We cannot build a strong Christian character without making room in our lives 
for secret prayer; for every thing pertaining to holy living is received by 
prayer and supplication.

Perhaps it is difficult for someone to understand that prayer proceeds out of 
the heart and mind of the worshiper. We must begin our praying in secret with a 
sincere purpose in mind and heart. What we have to say to God, we must say it 
from the heart, and not to be heard of men like the hypocrites.

We cannot make our hearts and minds a storeroom for earthly things, and at the 
same time have a secret place to meet God. Jesus said, "Enter into thy closet, 
and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to the Father. We are not ready to pray 
until our hearts and minds are divested of the cares and concerns of this world. 
When we have emptied our hearts of earthly things, and have shut the door of the 
mind against the din and confusion of this restless world, we can pray with the 
assurance of being heard. We cannot get God's door open until we get our door 
shut. When the mind is wandering, and the heart is filled with business affairs, 
the door is not closed, and we cannot pray. We have the power of will to shut 
the door of the heart and mind, and to concentrate all of the heart and mind in 
secret prayer. It requires effort of will, and a strong determination of the 
mind to overcome the distractions of daily living, and enter the closet and shut 
the door. But the reward for the self-denial is worth the efforts of the will to 
obtain it. When we have completely overcome these clamoring concerns of life, 
and mastered our many physical infirmities by the help of the Spirit, we can 
prevail in prayer. In the peaceful seclusion of our innermost souls we can 
commune with the Heavenly Father in perfect confidence; and the Father which 
seeth our hearts in secret shall reward us openly.

There is a quiet place where we can be separated from the confusions which 
clutter our minds and crowd our hearts in daily life; it is a sacred place 
where the multiplicity of things cease to congest our souls. It is a secret 
retreat where the door is closed, and the babel of boisterous voices calling 
for our attention cannot be heard, and all business pursuits bidding for our 
services are forgotten. There is a sheltered place for prayer where the 
floodgate of the soul can be opened, and the heart be relieved of its burden in 
the Presence of a sympathetic Father. It is the refuge of the soul where our 
tears can freely flow, and their unspoken language is understood. It is a silent 
and solitary place where the prying eyes of men cannot behold our sorrows and 
sufferings, and no one can make us ashamed and afraid.

The blessed Savior has disclosed the holy place, the hallowed room of secret 
prayer, where we can enter by faith, and close the door against our family, and 
our friends, and our foes, and on the pinions of prayer, pass beyond the limits 
of time, and invade eternity by the invincible power of the Name of Jesus.

I have often been so bewildered and hindered by my infirmities of body and mind 
that I did not know what to pray for as I ought. I was unable to utter the 
yearnings of my own heart. But the cry of my heart was heard in heaven, because 
the Holy Spirit had helped my infirmities. "The Spirit helpeth our infirmities: 
for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit himself 
maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that 
searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh 
intercession for the saints according to the will of God." (Rom. 8:26-27) 

This promise gives us great encouragement to pray from our hearts. The cry of 
the heart will be assisted by the indwelling Spirit, and He that searches the 
heart knows the mind and purpose of the supplicating saints, and will reward 
them openly.

We could not pray without ceasing unless much of our praying was done in the 
heart. It would be a physical impossibility to cry unto God day and night if we 
could not pray in the secret chambers of the soul. The secret praying of the 
heart is infinitely more than thinking a prayer. There is a language of the 
heart that God understands; there is a whisper of the soul, unheard on earth, 
but heard in heaven.

Praying in secret is not a substitute for praying in public; we cannot use this 
sacred privilege to justify our unwillingness to engage in the public worship of 
God in prayer. Jesus prayed in secret, and He prayed in public; His disciples 
were blessed and edified by hearing Him pray.





6

A Sufficient Provision For Prayer

"Your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him." 
(Matthew 6:8)

After revealing the truth about the secret place of prayer, the Savior continued 
His discourse on prayer, and revealed the Heavenly Father's provision for 
answering prayer. We should take sufficient time to meditate on this revealed 
truth; because it is exceedingly important to have an understanding of this 
essential fact before we pray. We may know in a general way that God knows all 
things; but we continue to live in spiritual need, and struggle alone with our 
problems, and suffer alone in our troubles. We suffer these things because we 
have failed to fully grasp the import of this consoling revelation about the 
Father's provision for our diversified needs. 

The Savior's words assure us that the Heavenly Father has anticipated our many 
needs before we were born. Out of the generosity and infinite goodness of His 
loving heart, He has made a sufficient provision to satisfy every desire of our 
hearts, and to meet every demand of our lives.

It did not require one sleepless night of us to provide these things. We did not 
shed a single tear, or give one drop of our blood to provide them. We have not 
given a sacrifice from our flocks or our fields to purchase the things we need. 
Our Heavenly Father's great compassion for us has motivated Him to provide for 
our wants. "He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how 
shall he not with him also freely give us all things?" 

The fact that our Father has provided for our needs reveals that the unlimited 
resources of God are made available through prayer. It is written, "My God shall 
supply all of your needs according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus." 
(Phil. 4:19) Who can measure the extent of His riches in glory? When we have 
comprehended the fact of the Father's abundant supply for us, even before we ask 
Him, we can have the faith to ask Him for all things needful in life, and He 
will grant the requests in the Name of Jesus, our Lord.

I deem it necessary to stress the importance of the asking, because there is no 
other way to obtain the things we need. In the white light of the revealing 
words of Jesus regarding these things, there is no valid reason, and certainly 
no justifiable excuse, for spiritual poverty and want. But the evidence of 
spiritual need is apparent everywhere among the people of God. Moral weakness 
and spiritual instability is prevalent in the church. These deplorable 
conditions will cease to exist if the people of God will pray, and by faith 
draw upon the limitless riches of God in Christ Jesus. But we cannot expect Him 
to supply our needs when we are too indifferent and unconcerned to ask Him in 
faith.

If I can do nothing more than enlighten the saints of God about the power of 
prevailing prayer; and encourage them to explore the vast resources of the 
Father's provision for their needs, it will be a reward sufficient to compensate 
me for my labors of love. What I have learned in the school of prayer with the 
Master, is worth all it cost me in time to tarry in His Presence, and worship 
Him in spirit and in truth. 





7

A Scriptural Pattern of Prayer

"After this manner therefore pray ye." (Matthew 6:9-15)

The Lord's prayer is not a form of prayer, it is a pattern of prayer. The manner 
of our praying will follow this pattern of praying if we ask according to the 
instructions of Jesus. The prayer proceeds in an orderly manner from the opening 
words to the final Amen. There is perfect continuity in the prayer; it begins 
with worship and ends with praise.

The prayer follows the Savior's words, "Your Father knoweth what things ye have 
need of, before ye ask him;" and embraces in its scope every need of man. If we 
offer the words of this prayer in humility and sincerity, we have a right to 
expect our Heavenly Father to answer the petition, and supply our needs 
according to His riches in glory by Christ Jesus. Therefore let us come with 
confidence before our Father and make our requests known to Him. 

"Our Father which art in Heaven."

It has been stated that the secret place of prayer is in the heart of the 
worshiper; but the opening words of the Lord's prayer are addressed to "Our 
Father which art in heaven." There is no contradiction in the truth, for we know 
that the secret prayers of our hearts are spoken humbly to our Heavenly Father. 
There is no dividing line between a holy heart and a holy heaven; the 
Everlasting Father dwells in our hearts, and He dwells in heaven. 

When we say "Our Father which art in heaven," we must have in mind that there is 
a throne of grace where we can come with boldness, and obtain mercy, and find 
grace to help in time of need. I am convinced that no one can pray intelligently 
without first knowing the needs of his own heart, and knowing where the place of 
prayer is established. 

I asked a preacher to give me his concept of praying. He said that he conceived 
of God being a Great Spirit everywhere present, and that he prayed with this 
thought in mind. God is a Spirit: and they that worship Him must worship Him in 
spirit and in truth. But one cannot say "Our Father which art in heaven," if He 
is everywhere in general. Obviously this is not the concept of praying to the 
Father which Jesus reveals in the pattern of prayer. The Scriptures reveal the 
proper concept of approaching God in prayer. We see it prefigured in the 
ritualistic law of Israel's' worship. The Lord dwelt in the most holy place in 
the temple. The high priest entered this sacred place once each year, and 
offered the blood of the sacrifice for the sins of the people, and prayed for
them before the Lord.

We also know that when the people prayed they looked toward the temple where the 
Lord dwelt, and prayed facing the most holy place. The people dwelling in 
strange lands where they had been led captives, prayed with their faces turned 
toward Jerusalem, where the temple was located. 

In the covenant of grace we have a Great High Priest, that is passed into the 
heavens, Jesus the Son of God. He is the only Mediator between God and man; and 
He is seated on His mediatorial throne at the right hand of God.

We must follow the pattern of the worshipers in Israel, and turn our faces 
toward heaven, where Christ is seated on His mediatorial throne at the right 
hand of the Father. When we say, "Our Father which art in heaven, we should have 
a mental picture of these facts as revealed in the plan of Salvation.

I find it impossible to pray in faith until I have first formed a mental image 
of these fundamental facts. I must envision the Savior seated on His mediatorial 
throne to have a basis for praying in faith. I must see Him in the office of the 
Great High Priest before I can ask for the things I need.

The place of the Savior at the right hand of God is not fiction; neither is it a 
figure of speech. It is the abiding truth revealed in the infallible Word of 
God. The plan of salvation is a reality, and not a ritual. I cannot conceive of 
Jesus being in any place in the plan of salvation except at the right hand of 
the Father performing the work of the High Priest of our profession. 

I consider it necessary to emphasize these fundamental truths to show that, "Our 
Father which art in heaven," is not in some remote place far removed from us; 
but that He is in a place where we can see Him with the eyes of our 
understanding, and turn our faces toward Him in prayer, and be heard.

"Hallowed be thy name."

Prayer is a part of worship, it approaches the Heavenly Father with a true 
spirit of reverence and respect for His Name. Prayer recognizes the Holiness of 
the Father, and the sanctity of His Presence. coming boldly to the throne of 
grace does not extend to any one the right to be irreverent in his approach to 
God.

To worship the Lord at the beginning of prayer will be rewarded by His blessing 
and a conscious sense of His pleasure. If one prays thirty minutes, he will be 
richly benefited in spirit if he will worship the Lord at least one half the 
time of praying. It is a part of prayerful worship to make love to the Savior. 
He is pleased to have us tell Him of our love; and it pleases Him to have us say 
that we love Him because of what He is in His Adorable Person. Let the Savior 
hear you say that you are not following Him because of the things received from 
Him; tell Him that he is all, and in all to you in time and eternity. If you are 
sincere in you praise, you are sincere in your prayers.

Prayer is offered in the Name of the Savior, and prayer should recognize the 
meaning of the Name of the Savior. I find and unutterable joy to my own soul to 
recall the Names of the Lord recorded in the Scriptures. These Names have great 
meaning, because they reveal certain qualities of the Nature of the Lord. For an 
example, consider the Name, Almighty God. We can see at once that this Name 
reveals the unlimited power of God; and assures us that this invincible power is 
supporting our faith and hope for eternal life. The Lord said to Moses, "I AM 
THAT I AM," denoting Eternal Existence, and an Eternal Presence with His people. 
The prophet called Him Immanuel, which means, "God with us." The Name of Jesus 
Christ the Son of God is precious to the praying saints. His Name is Wonderful, 
Counselor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace." 
Hallowed be Thy Name, Thou Blessed Son of God. Thy Name is above every Name, for 
Thou art The King of kings, and Lord of lords. Thou art the Holy One, The Amen, 
and the Beginning and the End, the Alpha and Omega, the first Cause, the fixed 
center, and the final conclusion of all creation. In thee we live, and move, and 
have our being. "Hallowed be Thy Name," in the heavens above, and in the earth, 
which is Thy footstool.

"Thy Kingdom come."

The prayer brings us to recognize our need of the government of Almighty God. 
Prayer will bring our souls into perfect submission to the Sovereignty of God; 
and we will never question His right to reign over us in Supreme Authority.

The soul of man is one place where the Lord does not reign as King. All men have 
been created with the right of free will, and the power of choice. A man can 
accept the kingdom of God or reject it, and God will respect the right of man's 
choice. When we say, "Thy kingdom come," we state our choice to be governed by 
the Heavenly Father. When we say these words, we must yield the throne of our 
self-government to the Father, and give Him the undisputed authority to rule 
over our lives. If we say "Thy kingdom come," we must issue an invitation in 
prayer for the Lord to enter our hearts, and extend His Eternal Kingdom to 
include all that we are in body, and soul, mind and strength.

"Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven."

The Lord's prayer shows the need of man to be in obedience to the will of God. 
Prayer brings the will into complete conformity with. the Divine will, and links 
heave and earth in a oneness of spiritual relationship. When the will of man is 
in perfect accord with the will of God, his obedience on the earth will be like 
the obedience rendered in heaven. The willingness of the man to serve the Lord, 
and his purpose to please Him, will equal that of the angels in heaven. 

We have no basis for believing that our Heavenly Father will answer prayer, and 
give us the things we need, unless we sincerely say "Thy will be done."

The pattern prayer asks for harmony with the will of God for all time to come. 
The days ahead may bring poverty and privation, trials and troubles, 
nevertheless, "Thy will be done.'

The Father's will can mean sacrifice and suffering, for it presents the cross to 
us. There is no escape from the sufferings of the cross; there is no crown 
without a cross. When we offer the Lord's prayer we agree to all that the will 
of God contains for the present, and for the future: to refuse is to perish; but 
to yield means eternal life.

"Give us this day our daily bread."

Jesus discloses the fact that the worship of God is first in the order of the 
pattern prayer; and that we must say, "Thy Name," and "Thy Kingdom," and "Thy 
Will," before we can ask for our daily bread. We must recognize the Giver before 
we request the gift.

We frequently present our wants before we prayerfully worship. We pray about our 
needs, and forget to pray in His Name.

Our Father is not unmindful of our need of daily bread. This fact is vividly 
shown by the Savior's interest in the needs of His disciples. They could not 
forget the morning He stood on the shore of the sea, and said, "Children, have 
ye any meat?" He had compassion on them in the time of need; He fed them when 
they were hungry, and blessed their labors with a miracle. The same loving Jesus 
told us to ask the Heavenly Father for our daily bread.

The prayer does not imply that the supply of bread will be greater than our 
daily requirement. But if the goodness of God grants us an abundance, and gives 
us security against a future want; let us not turn our hearts away from Him.

"If riches increase, set not your heart upon them." (Psalm 62:10)

When one devotes so much time and effort to earn his daily bread, and neglects 
to pray and worship God, that man will suffer impoverishment of soul. To do this 
to the hurt of the soul is evil in the sight of the Lord. In this age of strife 
and selfishness, we can become slaves to our tasks, and allow our temporal needs 
to over shadow our spiritual needs. By all means, let us keep the worship of the 
Lord in the first place, and not seek earthly things more than we seek eternal 
things Seek first the kingdom of God, and His righteousness, and all these 
things shall be added. 

"And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors."

The pattern prayer brings us to a recognition of our indebtedness to our 
Heavenly Father. We have a moral obligation that must be settled by prayer. We 
have incurred the displeasure of God by transgressing His law, for sin is a 
transgression of the law. We have no merits to plead; and no money to pay the 
obligation. But our gracious Heavenly Father is willing to forgive us our debts; 
He does not ask us to pay, He only asks us to pray.

Our forgiveness is conditional: we must forgive our debtors, before God will 
forgive our debts. Our Lord said, "For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your 
Heavenly Father will also forgive you."

There is no pardon for the person that will not grant a pardon; there is no 
answer to the prayer of the man who will not forgive.

"Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil."

Our Heavenly Father knows that we have need of protection, and has enabling 
grace to preserve His people in the hour of temptation.

We are not to assume that we will not be carried into temptation; we must ask 
the Father to provide a way of escape when we are tempted. I have no fear of the 
Lord leading me into temptation without a purpose; but I am afraid of becoming 
careless and failing to watch and pray, and as a result, be overcome by 
temptation. We are safe as long as we pray, "Lead us not into temptation, but 
deliver us from evil."

"For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen"

Indeed we ascribe all the praise, and glory to Our Heavenly Father, and to the 
Lord Jesus Christ, Who gave us the pattern of prayer.





8

The Throne of Grace

"Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain 
mercy, and find grace for help in time of need." (Hebrews 4:16)

It has been stated previously that the approach to the throne of grace is 
through Jesus, our High Priest. I have also said that it is important to form a 
mental picture of the Savior seated on His mediatorial throne, which is the 
throne of grace. If one does not have a Scriptural concept of the mediatorial 
throne, he will find it difficult to pray because his mind will have no certain 
resting place. Wandering thoughts are due to a lack of concentration.

If we come "boldly" to the throne of grace, we must base our confidence upon the 
infallible Word of God, believing that we shall obtain mercy, and find grace for 
help in the time of need. We can approach the throne of grace with courage and 
confidence, having no doubts and fears about being heard. The Savior will not 
deny His faithful people; He will answer their prayers, and give them the 
desires of their hearts.

We base our faith and courage upon the fact, that we have an High Priest that 
can be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, because He has been tempted 
in all points as we are, yet without sin. The Savior is not unmindful of our 
infirmities of body and mind. He is sympathetic and understanding; He knows the 
meaning of our tears, and He knows the troubles which beset us in this world. 
Our prayers for mercy and help can touch Him, for He has been tempted in every 
point as we are tempted. He can sustain us in every trial, and enable us to win 
in every conflict; He has suffered for us in the flesh.

When we come to the throne of grace, we are not required to make an apology for 
our infirmities of body and mind; we do not need to explain our limitations. The 
Savior knows us, and is waiting to hear our prayers.

We should not overlook the fact that obtaining mercy is first in the order of 
praying at the throne of grace, for it is the Mercyseat. We have no meritorious 
claims of our own; we have nothing to commend us to God. Our only hope is in 
obtaining mercy, and not be rejected in a time of need. The consoling words of 
the Psalm encourage us to pray: "For thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive; 
plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon thee." (Psalm 86:5)

When we have come humbly to the Mercyseat, and obtained mercy in the Name of 
Jesus, we shall find grace for help in time of need. In the clear light of this 
truth, let us come unashamed and unafraid, and make our requests known unto God.

The Lord has enabled me to pray the prayer of faith a few times in my life; but 
I have discovered more about the power of prayer since making the covenant of 
prayer with the Savior, than I knew in the forty years of my ministry. I have 
learned how to take people into the Presence of the Savior, and talk with Him 
about their needs. I witness to the power of prevailing prayer, that my Heavenly 
Father may be glorified in His Son.

I entered a small cafe late one evening after a service at the church. The 
manager told me that his wife was seriously ill in a hospital; he said she had 
been unable to speak for several days. Immediately my heart was burdened for the 
sick woman. I told the husband that I would pray for his wife, for which he was 
very grateful. About four o'clock in the morning, I took this unknown woman on 
my prayer, and held her up before the Savior.

He gave the assurance that He had heard my prayer, and would help her. I 
returned two days later, and entered the little cafe. When the manager saw me, 
he cried out, "Mother is up, mother is up, and talking, and walking about the 
room." His daughter said to me, "Mister, what did you do to my mother?"

I told her that I held her mother up before the Lord in prayer. She began to 
weep, and said, "Mister, hold me up to God in prayer, I am such a wicked girl." 
This sick woman was ninety miles from the place where I prayed, but the distance 
did not prevent the answer to prayer.

I was praying in the quiet hours of the morning in February, 1950; when I formed 
the mental picture of the Savior on His mediatorial throne, and presented my 
request, I was enabled to see certain facts about the person for whom I was 
praying. By a power never before known to me, I was enabled to see into the past 
lives of persons, and remind them of certain incidents in their past that 
affected them in their spiritual lives. I certainly did not seek gift of 
spiritual discernment, if this was such a gift. But in more than a hundred 
incidents I have not been mistaken at any time.

My daughter Ruth, lived more than a hundred and fifty miles from my home. Ruth 
was unsaved, and my heart was greatly burdened for her. I took her on my prayer, 
and presented her before the Savior at the Mercy Seat. I saw the Savior lay His 
hand on her head, I could see her curly hair between His fingers. I told my wife 
about the vision, and we wept before the Lord, and gave Him thanks. The next 
morning when I prayed for Ruth, I saw kneeling by her bed in prayer; I saw the 
same thing the third morning. But the fourth morning when I prayed, I saw her 
standing, and knew that she had been saved by grace.

In a letter she said that the Saviour had put His hand on her head, and her mind 
was cleared of all confusion, and she recalled the truth of salvation, and had 
been saved by grace. 

I was in a hotel in Nashville, Tennessee, in March, 1950. In the quiet hours of 
the morning I prayed for my son, who lived three hundred miles from where I was 
praying. I presented my unsaved boy before the Saviour at the Mercy Seat. The 
Saviour spoke to me, and said, "I will save your boy tomorrow, kneeling at the 
couch in your living room in your home." I called my son by phone, and asked him 
to meet me at my home the next day. He gave me no assurance that he would come; 
but when I arrived home, my son was there to meet me as I had expected. The Lord 
saved him kneeling by the couch in my living room at my home according to His 
promise to answer prayer. My Father which seeth in secret had rewarded me 
openly.

There was a young woman who was unmoved by the power of God manifested in the 
great revival at Asbury College, in 1950. She told some of the students that it 
was nothing but emotionalism and excitement, and that she would have nothing to 
do with it. Several students requested me to join them in prayer for the girl to 
be saved. About four o'clock in the morning I presented this girl before the 
throne of grace. I did not know the young woman, but the moment I began to pray 
for her, I saw her running out of a lighted building, and running toward the 
darkness. The vision so impressed me, that I told some of the students to inform 
the young woman that I had seen her running from God.

About nine thirty that night, the young woman came to my home. She sat on a 
small footstool in front of me, and in anger told me that she wanted no part of 
the revival, that it was all emotionalism and religious excitement. I could not 
reason with her; for she was very angry at me for sending word to her about 
running from God.

In my own mind, I was convinced that her attitude toward the revival was a 
pretense, and that she was covering her sins. I told her I could find her real 
reason for rejecting the Saviour; and I began to pray for her. When I presented 
her before the Saviour, I saw a large hall, and an orchestra, and the leader of 
the orchestra standing before a microphone. But my attention was drawn to a 
young man playing the piano; I knew he had something to do with this girl's 
attitude toward Christ. When I asked the girl about the young man, she began to 
cry; and confessed that she had been attending the dance, and was at one time 
planning to marry the piano player. She said it was a secret, and was amazed 
that I knew it.

I began to pray again for her, and I saw a lighted room, and a table set with 
glasses for liquor: and I saw this young woman filling the glasses with liquor. 
When I asked her if she drank liquor, she began to scream, and said, "That is a 
cocktail party given in my home, and I gave a preacher's daughter her first 
drink. I have damned her, I have damned my best friend." She confessed covering 
her many evil deeds by pretending that she did not believe in the revival. She 
had no more fight against conviction left in her; she was completely broken in 
spirit, and was contrite of heart. Once more I took her to the Saviour in 
prayer; and I obtained mercy for her at the throne of grace. The merciful Lord 
saved her instantly; and she shouted with great joy for deliverance from sin.

An elderly man was seeking help at the altar. He was in deep despair, and 
discouraged by the trials which had beset him in recent months. He was 
distressed by his doubts, and had given up his testimony of salvation. He was 
eighty-five years of age, weak, and sick in body. It was my joy to take this man 
before the High Priest, who can be touched by the feeling of our infirmities. 
Knowing the truth, I came boldly to the throne of grace, and lifted this man up 
before the sympathetic Christ in prayer. I saw a little white church situated in 
a grove, out in the country. I saw a young man converted at the altar in that 
church; I could see him shaking hands with the people, and rejoicing with them. 
I saw the young man had dark hair, and a little mustache; and in some way, I 
knew that the elderly man at the altar was the young man I had seen in the 
little church. He told me that he was saved sixty-five years ago in the little 
white church in the country. He said, "My hair was dark, and I had a little 
mustache."

When I told him that the Lord had shown me these things, and that he had been 
converted in the little white church. The Savior blessed this humble man, and 
his doubts departed, and the joy of the Lord filled his heart. It was a time of 
need in the life of this man, and a merciful Savior had answered prayer, and 
given help in the nick of time.

Let us pray always, and not faint. God has promised to avenge His own elect 
which cry day and night unto Him.





9

Praying in His Name

"If ye shall ask anything in my name, I will do it." (John. 14:14)

The Father has given all things into the hands of His Son. The Word says, that 
God hath appointed the Son heir of all things. All power in heaven and in earth 
is given to Jesus, our Lord: and all praying must be done in His Name, because 
He is the only Mediator between God and man. 

Our right to ask in the Name of Jesus is based upon our relationship to Him, and 
to the Heavenly Father through Him. A child has a right to ask bread of his 
father by virtue of his relationship. But a beggar at the door cannot base his 
right to ask food upon relationship, because he is not a member of the family. 
The master of the house may give food to the beggar out of pity for his plight. 
But a Father gives food to his child out of the loving kindness for his own 
child.

Our Heavenly Father does not answer the prayers of His children because He has 
pity for them. He answers their requests out of the pleasure of His heart. The 
Word shows this to be true. Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we 
keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight." 
(I John. 3:24.) If our hearts condemn us because of disobedience and neglect, we 
cannot pray with confidence. But if our heart condemn us not, then have we 
confidence toward God.

The Savior places no limitations on the potentialities and power of prayer in 
His Name. He said, "If ye shall ask anything in my Name, I will do it." The 
power of prevailing prayer is unlimited, because the resources of the Father are 
unlimited. He is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or 
think, according to the power that worketh in us. Our God has resources of power 
and riches far beyond our finite minds to comprehend, and exceeding abundantly 
above all that we can ask.

When we examine the Savior's promise to give us anything we ask in His Name, we 
find the fundamental facts of the prayer of faith. In the words of the promise, 
the Savior reveals His Word, and His Will, and His work. These three facts are 
one, and constitute the basic facts on which we rest our praying in His Name.

The prayer of faith must rest first upon the Words of the Savior. The Word of 
God stands at the beginning of all revealed truth. Christ Jesus is the Word made 
flesh. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word 
was God."

The Savior disclosed this eternal truth about prayer, saying: "If ye abide in 
me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done 
unto you." (John. 15:7)

I am convinced that there are many people who believe the words of Jesus 
concerning praying in His Name. They have assented to the truth of His word, but 
do not have His words abiding in them. This fact is reflected in their living 
and in their praying. When questioned about the results achieved in prayer, they 
readily admit that nothing unusual has ever come to pass. When they hear of the 
unusual manifested in answer to prayer, they are reluctant to believe it to be 
true. 

We must believe from the heart that His promise is true because His word is back 
of every promise. We must not permit our reasoning to lead us into doubts when 
we pray in His Name. When we substitute reasoning for revelation we abandon 
faith and limit the Power of God. 

The prayer of faith rests upon the Will of the Savior to answer prayer in His 
Name. If one will make a careful search of the context, he will find the will of 
the Savior clearly revealed. The scope of His will embraces all the needs of the 
children of God. If they need consolation, He said, "I will not leave you 
comfortless." If they need love, He said, "I will love ... and my Father will 
love." If they need a revelation of God, He said, "I will manifest myself." 
These promises are unlimited in possibilities, and they are all expressions of 
the will of the Savior. The prayer of faith rests upon the Work of the Savior. 
"I will do it," said Jesus. There are many things to be given in answer to 
prayer, and there are many things to be done by the Savior in answer to prayer.

Our children receive both our gifts and our services in life. There are some 
things to be done for them; things that require action and achievement. The same 
is true concerning the children of God. Our Lord pledges Himself to act on our 
behalf; He places Himself under obligation to serve His own children, and work 
for them in life.

In His infinite condescension He took upon Himself the form of a servant. He 
revealed this truth in an amazing manner when He washed the disciple's feet. We 
saw the Maker of worlds in the form of a Servant; the King of kings kneeling at 
the feet of men. "I will do," said the Master. Yes it is true, He will answer 
your cry for help. He will show Himself strong and mighty to perform the work of 
redemption, and bring His people into their eternal inheritance. He is our 
Defense, and our Delight, and our Deliverer. His eyes are not dim, and His ears 
are not dull of hearing. His arms are not weak, and His footsteps never lag. He 
watches over us in the night, and He leads us by day. His hands were pierced by 
the nails of His cross, but they are hands that hold us securely in His loving 
care. His feet were wounded by a single spike, but He hurries to walk with us in 
the winding path of the just, which leads to the home of the soul. He carries 
our burdens on His strong shoulders, and puts the everlasting arms about us in 
the embrace of love.

The Architect of the ages has extended His works beyond this world, and has gone 
to prepare a place for us in the home of the Father. He has laid the 
foundations of the Holy City on the rock of His eternal Word. When our journey 
on earth has ended, He will open the gates of gold, and give us an abundant 
entrance into the everlasting Kingdom. Therefore the prayer of faith rests upon 
the oneness of the Saviour's Word, and His Will, and His Work.

I have labored to show that the faith to ask anything in His Name must rest upon 
the Word, and the Will, and the Work, of the Savior. It is now my purpose to 
show how faith operates on the basis of these three facts. There are numerous 
passages of Scripture revealing the power of faith but we select only one to 
show how faith operates in praying in His Name.

"Have faith in God. For verily I say unto you, That whosoever shall say to this 
mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall not doubt in 
his heart, but shall believe that those things which he saith shall come to 
pass; he shall have whatsoever he saith. Therefore I say unto you, what things 
soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have 
them." (Mark 11:22-24)

The first statement made by the Saviour is, "Have faith in God." If we have 
faith in His Word, and in His Will, and in His Work. The Savior's next statement 
shows how faith can engage the power of God to remove the mountain: "Be thou 
removed, and be thou cast into the sea."

It is evidently true that the man who has faith in God does not remove the 
mountain by his own works. He employs the power of God to do the work required 
to remove the mountain. Therefore according to the words of Jesus, our faith in 
God can command things to come to pass, and the Omnipotent God will obey the 
command of faith, and do the work. (See Isaiah 45:11)

Following these amazing facts about the power of faith, the Saviour shows how 
faith is applied to prayer. He said, "When ye pray, believe that ye receive, and 
ye shall have." He reveals that the desire of the heart will be granted on the 
condition of faith. If we doubt not in our hearts, but believe that the things 
we say shall come to pass, we shall have our prayer answered. Unbelief is the 
only thing that can limit the power of God, and prevent Him from answering our 
petitions.

In order to illustrate the working of God in answer to the prayer of faith, let 
us think of a man desiring to have the mountain removed. He is aware of the 
greatness of the undertaking, and knows that he is unable to move the mountain 
by his own efforts. But he knows of a company that can move it, and plans to 
engage them to do the work. Before he engages the company to perform the task 
required, the man must have faith in their word, and in their will, and in their 
work. His faith in the company will enable him to employ a power that he does 
not possess.

Now let us suppose that the man desiring to have the mountain removed has a 
doubt regarding the word of the company he plans to employ. He begins to reason 
about the possibility of the company being unwilling to do the work required. 
His unbelief will defeat his purpose, and leave him with the location of the 
mountain unchanged.

Perhaps the Savior directed our attention to a mountain to impress us with the 
fact that there are insurmountable barriers which we cannot remove by our own 
efforts. But we can command the power of God by faith, and He will remove the 
mountainous difficulties for us.

I am convinced that the littleness of our faith prevents God from doing many 
things for us which He has promised in His Word. We have allowed our own 
reasoning to limit our faith in God.

I have heard it said that the day of miracles is past. But where may one find 
this to be a fact revealed in God's Word? It does not exist as a fact. The man 
who says that the day of miracles is past, is evidently seeking an alibi to 
justify his own unbelief.

The Savior said, "He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; 
and greater works than these shall he do; because I go to my Father." 
(John. 14:12) Jesus connected this promise with the promise to answer prayer in 
His Name.

In the light of this truth we cannot doubt the fact of miracles. I cannot doubt 
the power of God to heal the sick any more than I can doubt His power to save a 
sinner.

The Savior did not promise to impart a supernatural power to any man to work 
miracles; neither did He empower a man to save a sinner, or sanctify a believer. 
But He did link the man that believed the Word of God with a power to pray the 
prayer of faith to heal the sick, and convert the sinner, and sanctify the 
believer.

When Peter and John healed the lame man at the gate of the temple they were 
performing the works of the Savior by faith. Peter said, "Why look ye so 
earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness we had made this man to 
walk?" "Through faith in his name (Jesus) hath made this man strong." 
(Acts. 3:12,16)

We have no power or holiness of our own that can heal the sick; but we have the 
Name of Jesus Christ: and in His Name we obtain the power to work the works of 
God.

My prayer is that the Blessed Savior will increase our faith; and enable us to 
draw upon the unlimited power of God by prayer.





10

The Savior Prays For His People

"He ever liveth to make intercession for them." (Hebrews 7:25)

The people of God can derive great comfort from the fact that the Savior is 
interceding for them. He is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto 
God by Him, seeing that He ever liveth to intercede for them.

Prayer is apparently an essential part of the plan of salvation because the Lord 
has made it a part of His changeless Priesthood. Speaking of the Savior, the 
Inspired Word says, "Who in the days of His flesh, when he had offered up 
prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to 
save him from death, and was heard in that he feared." (Hebrews 5:7)

The Son of God was not offering up prayers and supplication with strong crying 
and tears because He was afraid to die on the cross; He was interceding for lost 
souls. He knew that eternal death was the penalty for sin. He knew that mankind 
lived in darkness and under the shadow of death. His passion of prevailing 
prayer was motivated by the fear that we would perish in our sins; and His 
Infinite love and compassion moved Him to pray fervently that we might be saved.

The pardoning mercy of the Heavenly Father is made an essential part of the 
redemptive work of the Savior through His intercession. When He was suffering on 
the cross, He prayed, "Father forgive them; for they know not what they do." Our 
sanctification is a part of the plan of salvation; for the Savior prayed, 
"Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth. (John. 17:17)

The prayers of our Lord are living realities in redemption. His prayers are made 
available to us by faith, and become effectual in us the moment we believe on 
His Name. When a sinner asks for pardon he is immediately joined in prayer by 
the Savior. The same is true when the believer prays to be sanctified.

If we will consider the prayers of the Savior to be living realities, and not 
look upon them as events recorded in sacred history, we will be able to 
appropriate them by faith, and receive the spiritual benefits for which He 
prayed. The Savior's prayers live forever because He breathed into them the 
power of an endless life.

In order to illustrate this truth, let us think of a man earnestly praying to be 
sanctified. Now visualize the Savior kneeling by the man praying for him to be 
sanctified. The living prayer of the Savior, saying, "Sanctify them," is joined 
with the man's prayer to be sanctified, and the answer is assured by faith in 
the Word of God. When one grasps this fact about the Savior's praying, he can 
obtain every blessing of redeeming grace provided in the plan of salvation. 
Jesus is able to save all men to the uttermost extent of their sins, seeing that 
He ever liveth to make intercession for them.

The second fact revealed about the Savior's prayers for His people is that He 
intercedes for their preservation in this world. "Holy Father, keep through 
thine own name those whom thou has given me, that they may be one as we are... 
I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou 
shouldest keep them from evil." (John. 17: 11,15)

He is able to save His people to the uttermost extent of their probationary 
sojourn in this world, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession for them.

God permits His people to be tried; and what He permits He will not prevent. He 
never grants His people an indulgence to sin; but He does enable them to endure 
temptations to sin.

I am not convinced in my own thinking, that God permits His people to suffer the 
temptation to sin for the purpose of proving their sincerity, and their loyalty 
to Him. I certainly do not look upon the Savior's temptation in the wilderness 
as a test of His fidelity. I know that in some peculiar way He was suffering for 
His people. The Scriptures say, "In all things it behooved him to be made like 
unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in 
things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For 
in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that 
are tempted." (Hebrews 2:17-18)

We are never under the necessity to sin at any time in life; but we are liable 
to sin unless we are watchful and pry without ceasing. The Savior has made 
provision for His people if they are overcome in an hour of trial. "If any man 
sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous." 1 John 
2:1

This blessed truth is brought to light by the words of Jesus spoken to Simon 
Peter: "Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift 
you as wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and when thou 
art converted, strengthen thy brethren." (Luke 22:31-32) 

This wonderful truth shows us that the purpose of Satan is overcome by the 
Prayer of the Savior. We can find great consolation in knowing that every 
satanic plan, and infernal purpose of the enemy, is thwarted by the prayers of 
the Blessed Lord.

Suppose a man, that is sanctified, is overcome by temptation in an unguarded 
moment, and commits sin. Is it necessary for him to return to his first works, 
and repent, and be reclaimed from his backslidings? This question has been 
presented to me many times. My answer is, if the man did not sin willfully; if 
he did not plan and purpose in his heart to sin: then the gracious Savior's 
intercession will prevail for him, and sustain him in his relationship to God. 
But it must be understood by all, that the man must confess his sin, and trust 
in His Lord's mercy in such an hour. He must do this immediately, and not 
continue in the displeasure of God, and presume upon His mercy. Simon Peter wept 
bitterly after he had denied the Lord in an hour of severe trial. He had not 
made his plans to curse, and deny that he knew the Savior. The prayer of Jesus 
sustained the faith of his erring disciple. The traitorous Judas made plans to 
betray Jesus, and died without hope, and without the help of the prayers of 
Jesus. I am persuaded that there are many faithful persons in this evil world, 
who have found, that the Advocate with the Father, sustained them in a time of 
trial. Perhaps they grieved the Lord, and felt the sting of conscience; but when 
they came before Him in tears, they found Him a merciful and a faithful High 
Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the 
people.

My final word of exhortation is: do not presume on the prayers of the Saviour, 
and be led into a false security. But make much of the fact that He is at the 
right hand of God, and makes intercession for us.

In my own praying, I often ask the Saviour to pray for me. I ask Him to tell the 
Father that I love Him; and give Him thanks for sending His Son into the world 
to save me from sin. 

I have often prayed to Jesus, and requested Him to tell the Father that I was 
pleased with His Sovereign will in my life; and tell Him I was pleased with His 
will for my life. My soul has been greatly refreshed in these seasons of prayer.





THE END